hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for
2024 beginning in early February and
running through June Tammy and I an
assortment of special guests are going
to visit 51 cities in the US you can
find out more information about this on
my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye in my eth year of being in the
United States as an illegal I was
awarded the order of the red banner the
second highest decoration of the Soviet
Union that had to be uh uh approved by
the Central Committee of the party and
you know with that came a monetary Award
of
10,000 not rubles but dollar
so there was an
intellectual uh uh discrepancy there I
was being given uh an award of the in
the currency of the country that we were
trying to
[Music]
destroy hello everyone I had the
privilege today to speak with one Jack
barski guy about my age born in East
Germany um raised in the depths of the
Communist
catastrophe swallowed the propaganda as
young man hookline and sinker and was
recruited as while he was pursuing his
degree in chemistry recruited by the KGB
to act as a spy in the West
and he recounted his Tale in a book
called Deep undercover which was
published in 2017 and shared all that
with me today his double life in the US
his eventual um abandonment of the
Communist utopian intellectual project
his conversion as it turns out by the as
a consequence of the love of his infant
daughter his work for the FBI and his
current Enterprise now serving as a
mentor
to the young people to young people who
might be attracted say by the utopian
schemes of the of the intellectual
ideologues and so we walk through all of
that and uh that's very interesting
welcome aboard Mr barski I think what
came to my mind as the first mystery
when I went through your book was the uh
conditions of your upbringing now one of
the things that's very mysterious
thankfully to people in the west is how
it was that young people in particular
were enticed to swallow Hook Line and
Sinker the propaganda coming into
Eastern Europe from Russia especially
because and and I don't know how much of
this you knew when you were a child but
especially when the M there was such a
stark difference between the material
conditions in the west and compared to
the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe and
there was some knowledge of that so why
don't you start by telling everyone what
you experienced as a child and how you
saw the world you know up to the point
where you entered say entered
University uh first of all the the
communism didn't originate in Russia as
you know it it it was a German invention
KL Marx right and lenon was the one who
actually put this into practice so there
there there was still communist thinking
residual communist thinking in in in
East Germany and and uh and there were a
lot of refugees when Hitler took over
they went went to the Soviet Union and
then came back and sort of took over
rather
quickly uh so how did we buy what they
were selling there was nothing else on
the market there was no there was no
free market of ideas it was a massive
massive brainwashing from from
kindergarten on and uh you know I tell
people then if if you if everybody you
know that family teachers friends of
friends relatives tell you that the moon
is made out of cheese that becomes like
part of H you know part of the
foundational knowledge of how the world
operates there was no God there there
was just you know it was just the the
idea the Romantic idea of communism uh
be becoming the force that will free all
the suppressed nations in the world and
but by the way that is very easy easy to
buy into and I was 100% by the time I
left College I was still 100% a
communist uh so so um and and a lot of
my generation too the what what the the
Communists in East Germany did very well
they focused on the Next Generation Us
in particular they focused on the ones
that uh had uh uh really reasonably high
level of intellect because we were going
to be the leaders the the leaders of for
the of the future and one more thing
about the wealth of the West well we we
we weren't allowed to travel to the West
we sort of knew that uh you know they
they had a higher standard of living but
this was rationalized very quickly and
easily because the you know the NATO
countries you know imperialist countries
were stealing the wealth from the third
world like the United States stole stole
the bananas from Guam Mara and so on
right okay so so let me let me ask you
some more specific questions about that
one of the things that you alluded to
was that the idea that you were working
for freedom of the oppressed was
actually a powerful motivator and so I
want to unpack that a little bit I mean
it's obvious
when we look at the world wherever we
sit that some people are more favored
than others along any dimension of
comparison you can possibly imagine now
Marx made the economic comparison Prim
primary pointing out that well I suppose
that the poor will be with us always so
to speak but
that and and and it is definitely the
case that that difference in in Economic
Security and
opportunity
exists and is somewhat painful to all
observers I mean I suppose there are
some successful people who Pride
themselves on the fact that they have
plenty While others have none and are
pleased at that status differential but
my experience with decent prosperous
people is that even and most
particularly the decent prosperous
people are still unhappy that there is
poverty and suffering anywhere in the
world that there is even relative
privation and and I would say it's part
of the moral striving that's part and
parcel of the human psychological
landscape to want to remediate that and
so if the Communists are offering some
Future Vision where suffering is a thing
of the past then in some ways they're
capitalizing on that longing in the
human soul for suffering as such to be
dispensed with
with and you know and so that makes it
perfectly understandable the I've been
writing about this a little bit the
pathological part of it is that it seems
to me and I I want to know what you
think about this is that as soon as you
make the assumption that anybody who's
who is more talented or who owns more is
more talented or owns more because
that's and and that that can only occur
as a consequence of Injustice and
oppression and
exploitation then you're setting up a
situation where anyone who has any
success whatsoever can be hated and and
and what would you say persecuted with a
good conscience and so I'm wondering you
you must have thought about this a fair
bit how do you think it's possible for
people to separate their moral impulse
to Aid the oppressed from their immoral
impulse to damn the successful all right
so you you raised a highly comp issue
and I I can only address as as much as I
have lived through it through the
situation uh first of all I we I grew up
in the country we were all equally
poor U so I didn't really understand the
concept of poverty as a young child and
even even when I went to high school
because they there there were no wealthy
people around us um and with regard to
wealth of the West it was just a you
know it wasn't tangible so there was
there was nobody to hate actually at
that point we started hating all of us
when the war in Vietnam got really bad I
mean I would I would have signed up and
uh and and fought on on behalf of the
Vietnamese but here's here's an
interesting uh an interesting
shift uh so I did really really well in
high school and I did so well in in
college that I uh received a uh national
scholarship that was uh limited to 100
concurrent users holders in the country
100 I I I joined the elite I got it the
the scholarship paid me as much as uh as
my my salary when I was a an assistant
professor I was a rich student and I was
you know it's probably quite
understandable that I be was really full
of myself and then everybody admired me
uh and so I
became uh intellectually the kind of a
person who will help all the people who
need help the stupid people you know I
would you know this is the condescending
attitude that uh you know the the elite
has
uh a lot let's put it this way we have
it in this country we have it in Western
Europe you know if if we are up there
like we look at down at the little
people and said well they can't take
care of themselves we you got to do it
for them and then and it it it starts
with goodwi and then very often uh
degrades into uh not so good simply
because the elite needs to stay where
where it is to fulfill its Mission
there's a
rationalization okay and we we live
better and we have make more money and
all this because we deserve it so so
that's uh I I never had a chance to to
hate the capitalist with the Vengeance
because I I did know him well enough it
was more theoretical the exploitation of
man well I think your comments on that
intellectual presumption are extremely
interesting mean I've been trying to
work through that Dynamic
theoretically because there is an
association
between that intellectual
pride and utopian presumption you know
when you you just laid out a
psychological Dynamic you said you were
young
you were celebrated for your
intellectual prowess and you can see
that intellectual prowess is valuable
personally and socially and so you can
understand that it being valued is
appropriate but then you pointed to the
fact that if it's celebrated
inappropriately it tends to produce a
kind of intellectual pride and
condescension and then that works in
sync see it works oddly in sync with the
utopian presumptions of Communism
communism is a very intellectual system
and it was designed by someone who had
very deep intellectual pretensions marks
himself and it it's that that it's that
Unholy combination of intellectual pride
and the proposition that you're acting
in that Pride on behalf of people who
are too foolish or stupid or ignorant or
blind or otherwise uh what in capable of
taking care of themselves right and then
you could say well you're doing that for
all the good reasons but you pointed out
right away that there was an element of
overweening pride in that that was
attractive to you because you were
celebrated for your intellect when you
were young absolutely and one one other
thing if your frame of reference is
mankind you you it's very difficult to
to not be full of Pride if if you get to
a point where you realize that there's
this big universe that uh
was created by some power whatever you
want to call it that then then that uh
that arrogance shrinks very quickly so
do you think that it's possible to not
suffer from that arrogance especially if
you're an intellectual or intelligent if
you don't have a reference point outside
yourself or outside or even outside of
the of mankind as such because you can
imag imagine someone trying to make a
moral case that the appropriate level of
of analysis for a properly morally
oriented young person is
the good of mankind as such but you
could counter that by saying well look
what the hell do you know when you're 18
and you know maybe you should take care
of your own local concerns like someone
who's properly humble instead of
attributing to yourself the ability at
such a young age to understand
everything that needs to be understood
about all the economic and social
systems of the world and to bring about
with your own efforts and to your own
credit this hypothetical
Utopia H yes but here's the thing um I
want to just contribute this I'm not
necessarily chiming in with what you
just brought up uh when when you are as
as well-meaning as you are uh to help
the down trodden and the less gifted uh
you you become a member of the elite and
and some people some people will kiss up
to you and then you rationalize I
remember an C CEO of a company that uh I
worked for he had a chauffer chering him
all around all the time and and the
rationalization was his time is too
valuable that is why Elite also needs to
have private airplanes right because you
know for for and and and this you you
get used to this you get used to uh
being adored and you know being
celebrated and and it's it's
fundamentally impossible to not become
full of yourself that there I I bet you
there are some people who who are humble
by nature but the majority of us are
not yeah okay so the pathway there is
that as soon as you have pretensions to
operating on behalf of something
approximating Universal salvation
brought into being in consequence of
your own intellectual efforts and your
beliefs is that the probability that
you're going to suffer from inflation of
ego is virtually certain at that point I
I am 100% certain of that it's not just
because I went through that uh you know
there's a a lot of my uh my colleagues
and and other gifted people that uh you
know joined the cause the party the
government
uh and and and in East Germany the
government the party was the elite and
and as in in you know the way communism
uh is constructed you know the working
class is supposed to rule but the
working class needs a spokes person or
an organization that speaks on its
behalf and those people weren't working
class they they were the intellectual
Elite some of them were pretty dumb but
uh a lot of them were at least clever
right so so one of the things you're
you're pointing to two things there too
you're also making the case I would say
that even in a society that purports to
hope to eradicate the economic
Elite Elites are likely to arise
regardless and in the country that you
grew up in in East Germany the economic
Elites were rapidly replaced by the
intellectually pretentious Elites let's
say and then that that's like a of the
argument you're making but there's
something else that's interesting there
too because you opened up your argument
by in two ways you pointed out that the
Soviet
propaganda was the water communist
propaganda was the water in which you
swam when you were young and it was
everywhere and that there was really no
escaping it but then you made a
secondary argument which was yeah but at
the same time swallowing that propaganda
and then operating successfully Within
in that system was something that
appealed to your pride and so that you
had a reason a personal reason for
buying into it it reminds me know I've
been thinking about the doctrines of
power like the Communist and the
postmodern doctrines I've been thinking
them in relationship to the story of
Cain and Abel because in the story of
Cain and Abel you have Cain who's at
least regards himself as downtrodden and
unfairly oppressed by Abel and by God he
goes to complain to God and he
attributes his failure to the Injustice
of the world and God says in response to
him that his failure is actually at his
feet and that the thing that's tempting
and possessing him making him bitter and
resentful sat on his door and tempted
him but he invited it in right that's a
crucial thing is that so there there's a
there's a there's a what would you say
there's a metaphorical equivalence there
that I'm trying to tease out on the one
hand you said you were fed a Non-Stop
diet of propaganda and you know I think
increasingly that's the case for young
people in the west but on the other hand
you said well that also redounded to
your advantage right because it put you
in a position of elite status and
appealed to your pride and so would you
say is it reasonable to say that it was
the combination of those two things AB
absolutely allow me to allow me to
illustrate when when I was uh uh asked
by the
KGB uh after like 18 months of them
checking me out uh they asked me so so
are you going to join us and I was uh
really torn because you know I knew I
was going to have to do take some
inordinate risk I knew I would have to
say goodbye to my life that I was very
comfortable with uh and and on and on
and on I knew that I would have to stop
playing basketball it was a passion of
mine uh but the combination of knowing
that I was going to be a hero for the
cause and that I would be able
to
uh part partake of the wealth in the
west okay I would be able to travel and
I knew I would have a good life as a
matter of fact they sold me this way
said well you going to live in you're
going to live in big house and drive uh
you know F fancy cars my God that
combination would that actually made me
say yes okay okay so now you're bringing
an additional element into the equation
so you know I was just rereading gir's
faou the other day and Fa is
intellectually
pretentious and also and and sick of
life and mephesto the bargain mephesto
offers him is a combination of worldly
pleasure and intellectual
dominance right and so that's why he
makes a deal with the devil so to speak
and so it it's interesting that you also
bring up the fact that you were being
offered the the fruit that was forbidden
under communism which was that pathway
to an elevated an elevated uh what would
you say material life in the west and
that and and Okay so when so that this
this speaks to your you being recruited
as University student okay so you're
swimming in propag may I may I interrupt
you I want to take it one one step
further because it gets bizarre uh I uh
in uh in my eth year of being in the
United States as an illegal I was
awarded the order of the red banner the
second highest Declaration of the Soviet
Union that had to be uh uh approved by
the central commit of the party and you
know with that came a monetary Award of
10,000 not rubles but
dollars so there was an
intellectual uh uh discrepancy there I
was being given uh an award of the in
the currency of the country that we were
trying to destroy so so the the the
entire KGB was sort of uh uh infused
with with that uh
dichotomy well I wanted to ask you about
moral conundrums but but let's walk
through your recruitment okay so you're
a young guy you're smart now you're
actually being an offered a pretty
interesting combination of Adventures a
so you you get the material luxury and
the excitement of traveling to the West
you get the excitement of of acting as a
double agent you you're you're you're
you can tell yourself and you're being
told that you're acting only on behalf
of the world's
oppressed right and it and you get to
join the elite on the intellectual side
right that's a pretty headyy offer you
know one of the things I do think about
in relationship to what young people are
being offered in the west is and this is
something the radical leftists are
really good at is that they have this
vision of Adventure as one of their
offerings you know the the conservatives
tend to push back against the utopian
presumptions of the left but they don't
offer uh they don't offer as
well-developed a vision of let's say
romantic adventure and so I think they
let the young people languish well you
know you're you're making the case that
you were being offered something that
was pretty heady right I mean you you
got to leave your country you got to be
an adventurer you got to work for the
poor at least you got to tell yourself
that and that all redounded to your
intellectual advantage and to your
status when you were let let's walk
through this stages of your recruitment
when you were in college and university
and I'm also interested were you racked
with moral
conundrums while you were making the
decision to work for the KGB you know
you you just told me what they put on
offer now had you bought the
propagandistic line completely there
wouldn't have been any moral conundrum
because of course you would have been
working for nothing but the good but you
already told me that you I don't know if
you became aware of this later or at the
time that your motives were contaminated
by your own pride and also by your own
say consumeristic Desir so what did you
have to wrestle with morally when you
were being
recruited nothing uh and I tell you uh
the uh had I had a girlfriend a steady
girlfriend or a wife at the time that
would have been uh that would have been
something to really wrestle with I did
not wrestle with uh uh lying to my
mother because my mother was uh a very
domineering
disciplinarian and uh I did not grow
grow up in a loving family the words the
German
words I never heard as a child spoken at
one adult to another or one adult to me
so it was all very tough discipline so I
had I had no emotional uh uh tie to my
mother and that would have been the only
moral qu I would have stepped into
everything where just friendships and
relationships so and and that was that
was easy to to deal with okay so why why
was that easy to deal with why were you
willing was the offer that was on at
hand clearly attractive enough so that
the price you paid in terms of
friendships and so forth leaving your
your interest in basketball that all PED
in comparison to this potential
Adventure well it didn't pale but I you
know when we're talking about
a moral quander I didn't betray anybody
I mean they had had they known where I'm
going they would have cheered me on so I
I I I betrayed somebody down the road
but uh at that point that came not into
play okay so tell tell me what did you
study when you were in University and
and I believe it was in university when
you joined you decided to join the
Communist party and it was partly
because you also knew at that time like
everyone knew that if you didn't become
a member of the Communist Party your
career Ambitions were going to be
severely truncated so walk us through
that and then also through your training
not severely truncated but limited uh
and I and I I did join the party because
that you know that that was like the
right thing to do you know pretty much
all the smart uh ambitious uh
individuals join the party by the way
the party at University wasn't as dumb
as you know the front page of the
Communist Party newspaper you know we we
were pretty open with one another and uh
there were people complaining about that
our leaders really weren't uh weren't
the right leaders so so there was some
openness and some camaraderie that
wasn't so
bad uh and there was some tolerance of
uh things that were forbidden such as
listening to Western radio stations so
the party was not a bad thing uh and uh
but the funny thing is you know I
studied chemistry but here's another um
piece of irony we had one course in uh
in in
um philosophy it was called uh
scientific Marxism
leninism and so the thing is we bought
into this idea that Marxism leninism was
a science just like on on par with
physics because Mark discovered the the
the laws that govern the evolution of
human society and we were just like
helping out to to bring about the end
state which is you know the Communist
Paradise on on Earth so you know this
was this was all very consistent and I
had no reason to question because again
because of the elite status I had why
would I why would I want to just like
question the system that did that really
treated me very
well whether you're feeling Str Ed
anxious or simply seeking a moment of
peace and Tranquility the Hallow app has
something for you hallow offers an
incredible range of guided meditations
and prayers that are designed to help
you deepen your spirituality and
strengthen your connection to God with
hallow you can explore different themes
and types of prayer and meditation such
as gratitude forgiveness and centering
prayer you can also choose from
different lengths of meditation to fit
your schedule whether you have a few
minutes or an hour with its userfriendly
interface face and hundreds of guided
meditations the Hallow app has quickly
become a go-to resource for people
seeking spiritual growth and healing
download the app for free at hall.com
Jordan you can set prayer reminders and
track your progress along the way hallow
is truly transformative and will help
you connect with your faith on a deeper
level so what are you waiting for
download the Hallow app today at
hall.com Jordan that's hall.com
Jordan hall.com Jordan for an exclusive
3 month free trial of all 10,000 plus
prayers and
meditations okay so you joined the party
when you were in college and you were
studying sciences and you you accepted
the rationale that Marxism was a
scientific discipline and that it its
outcome in some ways was not only
desirable but inevitable you were
speeding that along you had your moral
rationals for that lots of people
believed that that was the case and
certainly everyone almost everyone at
least made that claim in public how did
it come that you started to work
specifically for the KGB how did they
find their potential partners and allies
in in Eastern Germany I I can't I uh for
the life of me I cannot Trace back who
actually suggested to the KGB or what
suggested to the KGB to get in touch
with me uh my guess is that uh they had
access to the files that this kept on
every adult in the country and and and
if they and and they did the same thing
that the CIA has been doing uh for a
long time they recruited students at uh
you know and and you know in that were
at universities the quality universities
so you know you this a targeted search
and they come they come up to my record
and say wow you know not only is he
academically uh outstanding he
also um is a part party member he plays
basketball and uh he's a student leader
who who leads the the the the the groups
of students and playing the guitar so
there was there was something there said
we got to take a look at this guy and so
one day they knocked on the door you
could not reply by the way to uh to you
wouldn't I wouldn't even know where
where the KGB was situated there was no
uh phone number there was no address so
they they they see they they sought out
who they would want to talk to and one
day that happened uh that somebody uh
came to visit me in a dorm room I don't
want to make the story too long it was a
German and I thought it was
stazi uh but uh it was not because you
know after some some talk some he asked
me just like one question whether I I
would be uh would imagine could IM
imagine that one day after I graduate I
would work for the government and I and
I I read between the lines and I gave
him the answer he was looking for I said
yeah absolutely but not as a
chemist so uh so so then he uh invited
me to have uh lunch or you know that's a
big meal in Germany at the uh number one
restaurant in town and uh as I'm as I'm
I see him sitting there I walk into the
restaurant there's another a person at
the table and I was a little bit
hesitant but he came my first Contact
came up to me led me to the table and he
said oh by the way I'm I would like to
introduce Herman we are cooperating with
our Soviet comrades and then he said
goodbye and that's how I landed with the
KGB because Herman was a Russian so do
you want to tell everybody who's
watching and listening the difference
between and the similarities between the
Stasi and the KGB and also why you ended
up working specifically for the KGB
rather than the stasy well I I think the
KGB got first dibs on on candidates that
they really wanted KGB and stazi were
like uh big brother and little brother
they operated the same way the KTB was
more radical with regard to how they
dealt with in dissidents I mean you know
the gulags uh there were millions in
gulags there were thousands and maybe a
couple hundred thousand uh dissidents
and eam in jails but it it wasn't quite
as oppressive and and obviously the KGB
was much much much bigger in terms of
numbers raw numbers uh the stazi was
pretty big but you know as far as when
when you when you take into
consideration how many people were
full-time employees and how many people
actually cooperated and and you you're
familiar with the lives of other of that
movie Yes uh you know where where where
you know family members spied them on
other family members it was a rotten uh
system it was a rotten society and I
never had a Hint it didn't happen in my
family and I never had a friend who
would talk about something like this so
I had no reason to reason to question
that H well I was actually curious about
that because I was wondering we know now
that about one in three people in East
Germany were informing for the stazi
and they were often informing on family
members and friends and my sense is I
can't see how that could possibly be the
case without corrupting the culture to a
massive degree you mentioned earlier
that you had a rather cold relationship
with your mother and so I was wondering
you know to what degree were family
relationships in East Germany in general
fragmented how much of that had to do
with the culture of informing and did
and were you unaware of the fact that
this culture of informing was so deep
and had had a corrupting influence on
the culture at large I I was totally
unaware I lived in a
bubble how do you think it was that that
you were that you had been protected
from
that well I wasn't the only one my best
friend uh uh who who I still have a
relationship with um he he lived in the
same
bubble uh
somehow see but I now now something
comes to mind we had amongst the student
population there were about uh 80 of us
we had a couple of guys that didn't fit
in and they weren't they weren't
academically that great but they were
like they were just like a pain in the
neck and and and they were eventually
eliminated and nobody would have had a
problem reporting on those because they
you know they were in the way and they
could become animated right so so
there's a rationalization going on so
there was some I I actually had some
exposure to particularly the fate of
this one fellow who who was expelled
from University but I tell you uh the
the
opposite I had a uh roommate a dorm
roommate who was uh one of the few
people that
openly uh confessed that he was a
believing Catholic and he was a good
student and when it uh when the and I
was the leader of the Communist the
section of the Communist party for uh
the section chemistry and when it came
to a point where the decision was made
who would go on for a
doctorate
I thought he was a good guy he was a
smart guy and asked him one question I
said if if you had to take up arms to uh
to defend the EAS German Democratic
Republic would you do it and he said yes
he has a
doctorate so so there were some things
you know that that you could move in the
right direction you had to be in the
right environment and and University was
not as stiff and not as uh uh you know
dogmatic with regard to
Communism so once you had this interview
at the cafe and you how first of all H H
what was offered to you at the cafe
and then how did you start working with
the KGB oh no no no oh
sorry nothing was offered to me other
than let's let's meet so and then I
would I meet I would meet Herman uh for
like at least 6 months just in his
vehicle and we would just talk a little
bit and and he you know he he opened the
the curtain a little wider a little
wider and I understand that now that uh
I have some you know in hindsight he
would go back after a meeting and he
would take notes because uh there there
was a k KGB archist who saw the files on
me there were like several binders big
binders so so after six months he must
have decided that I was worth uh
pursuing further and so we then met in
an
apartment okay and that's where he gave
me some Western literature to to read
and that's where we talked a little a
little more about uh um about what it
would be like to go to West Germany as
an
illegal um oh just one thing that that
was very important for him to find out
and and my uh my situation in life
really made that possible I he became an
arsat's
father uh he was about about 10 years
older than me and my dad was was a a
weak link you know he was do he was six
years younger than my mother she was the
domineering the smart
one uh and you know he couldn't play
with me he had polio and and he we never
had a father-son talk and eventually he
he got out of that marriage and and
disappeared for my life so so I uh
was grateful that I could talk to an
older person an older man and I shared
everything with them I still remember
you know what I said I'm so shy amongst
the girls and you know I don't know I
just can't talk to the girls he said you
keep one thing in mind I still remember
that they are looking for men the same
way you're looking for a woman it didn't
help much at the time but but but you
know we had this relationship and
eventually he got to a point after 18
months that he had discussed uh uh
interviewed me enough and studied me
enough that he suggested to headquarters
to make me an offer that's when it
happened it took 18 months and one other
thing you being a psychologist you'd be
surprised that I never met a
psychologist or somebody who studied
people who work for the KGB the only
thing with regard to uh people skills
and understanding people that was handed
to me one day was the uh the book by uh
Dale Carnegie how to um make friends and
influence people it's ironic isn't it
yeah yeah that's for sure yeah so do you
do you think that your relationship with
him to what degree was your relationship
with him a genuine relationship of
caring and
mentorship yes it was absolutely if uh I
uh met only one individual that I
interacted with in the KGB who I
absolutely didn't like he was was an
agent in Moscow and he became my liaison
for a for a while if if that person uh
was Herman or you know was played the
role of Herman I may have thought about
the whole situation twice this guy was a
really wonderful guy were you excited
about the fact that you were having
these clandestine meetings in first of
all a car and why in a car and then
later in the in the apartment like was
that part of the adventure and Intrigue
that was an attractive element of of
what was unfolding no that part wasn't
that exciting no uh you know what what
uh uh what was uh really uh good for me
that I that I had a
secret uh so I I had a I was even
elevated higher than everybody else knew
so so the pride increases right but but
the what he gave it Herman gave me some
things to do and they were not
necessarily things that I comfortably
did such as you know
reaching ringing a doorbell and under
some pretense talked with the person who
answers the Bell to find out something
about a relative of their in in West
Germany that was hard but my ambition
didn't allow me to fail I'm I pulled it
off so but that that was unpleasant it
it became much more interesting the
first time I uh uh had the ability to uh
go to West
Berlin and look around you know this is
that so you know the Germans have
something in their DNA it's called wo
the uh the the desire to travel and I
that that was a big desire I wanted to
see uh you know uh Rome and Paris I had
read about these cities and you know
West Berlin that was my first Adventure
and then uh my second Adventure was in
Canada believe it or not it was a test
test trip to where I spend a lot of time
in Montreal all right so you what
happened in at 18 months what kind of
offer were you made and how did that TR
how was that transformed into this trip
to West Berlin yeah so uh that uh was
very interesting Herman uh sent me to
Berlin he didn't tell me but by the way
the KGB Almost Never gave me any
background why they make a decision this
that or the other there was nothing
there was no schedule no planning
nothing they shared with me it was ad
hoc they probably knew what they were
doing I didn't so he sent me to uh
Berlin for some additional training so
uh that's when I had my first
clandestine meeting when you when you go
uh that was a little bit of an adventure
when when you go to a certain spot meet
somebody who you don't know you don't
know what they look like and you have
you you exchange keywords so you know
you're talking to the right person and
so he gave me some things to do he gave
me uh Western mag West German magazines
to read in the the day before my
departure back to where I studied he
took me to the Soviet
headquarters and Soviet Army
headquarters in in East Berlin and which
was also the KGB headquarters and he
took me to uh an office and there was
this this small man sitting behind the
desk very unimpressive but the moment he
opened his mouth and he spoke only
Russian uh there was a phenomenal amount
of Psych psychological energy coming at
me you know he did a little bit of small
talk about you know how we need to uh um
do our best to defeat the evil
capitalists and Nazis and so so forth
and and then he
180 out of out of the blue asked me the
question so are you in or not I didn't
expect
that and I think this was this was
deliberately arranged that way so uh I
said well I I don't know if I qualify
and you know I don't have any training I
I didn't want to give an answer I wasn't
ready I hadn't thought about it and uh
and he said you
qualify and we will train you but
there's one thing there's one
requirement that we only work with
people who can make big decisions very
quickly you have until tomorrow noon to
give me an
answer uhhuh uhhuh that that that made
that made for interesting sleepless
night right well that's also an appeal
to Pride because he's giving you the
opportunity to demonstrate that you're
one of those decisive people people so
yeah the good good point but but you
know decision or not I was an academic
and and I was uh was learned I learned
how to operate with logic and I tried
the logical arguments of this and that
and and uh and it came out
50/50 so so this is when uh when when uh
it started that in in my my life my
subconscious my gut made the
decision and I and I said yeah the there
was no forcing argument that says I got
to go because there was so so much good
development ahead of me in staying in
East Germany unfortunately I would have
wound up in the government and I would
would have eventually become a miserable
old communist so so I'm very glad I made
that decision and uh and that that's
when I then I became officially not an
employee but a sort of a
uh a cooperating agent so to speak
because the employees had to have Soviet
citizenship starting a business can be
tough especially knowing how to run your
online storefront thanks to Shopify it's
easier than ever Shopify is the global
Commerce platform that helps you sell at
every stage of your business from the
launch your online shop stage all the
way to the did we just hit a million
orders stage shop ify is there to help
you grow our marketing team uses Shopify
every day to sell our merchandise and we
love how easy it is to add more items
ship products and track conversions
Shopify helps you turn browsers into
buyers with the internet's best
converting checkout up to 36% better
compared to other leading Commerce
platforms no matter how big you want to
grow Shopify gives you everything you
need to take control and take your
business to the next level sign up for a
$1 per month trial period at shopify.com
jbp go to shopify.com jbp now to grow
your business no matter what stage
you're at that's shopify.com
[Music]
jbp so how long how long after they took
you on board did you go to West Berlin
and what did they have you do there
apart from these clandestine meetings
and what did you think when you got to
West Berlin yeah let me tell you
something first of all uh I when I
thought I was in so you know I packed my
bags and W up in in in Berlin I wasn't
in yet they were still testing me so so
I meet my new Handler a different guy
and I I'm in his car and uh and I
expected that I'm going to have a really
really nice apartment because of was the
KGB you know you know I I had lived in a
dorm uh for for for the previous seven
years and uh and he we we sit down and
uh Nikolai was his name he he turned to
me he says I already have a task for you
I said what really and then he said you
got to find a place to
live that is in a place where there was
a shortage of uh of uh living space and
all living space was uh controlled by
the government there was an impossible
task all right so that was a test I
didn't know it was a test but but you
know I I responded the right way I I did
I didn't make a face I didn't uh I
didn't make the argument that this is
impossible I just went about and found
something I
found the worst place I've ever lived in
is a like a one room in a concrete
structure uh that had uh running cold
water a chair and a
bed and I didn't I didn't tell this guy
and I think I think that impressed him
greatly so if I fa this I'm out at that
point when if you're out your career is
over too I couldn't have gone back to
the university so I had no idea that I
was an indent species and and West
Berlin was the final
test and so the they had me go there
twice with an easterman passport and the
first time they just said uh you just
walk around you know have a beer take
this you know look at the stores like
just get
get a feel for the
place and uh so as I as I show up and
you know I I emerg from the subway and I
look around and the first impression
was
oh I I um tell people nowadays uh that
to to make it to make it clear what the
difference was between the East and the
West the West Was a movie that was made
in color
in the East it was all black and white
because almost our buildings were brown
or gray it was
ugly and there were a couple of nice
buildings but generally it was ugly so
that was very interesting and I I and I
looked at through the display Windows of
the department stores a the beer was
better The Sausage was better but you
know this all yeah on the one hand you
rationalize it away on the other hand it
says hey that's going to be good life
right so I the second visit I had to
pass yet another test I had to ring the
doorbell in an apart apartment building
and make friends out of the people that
that answered the uh the door and I did
good and the reason I knew for sure that
was another test and that if I failed
that test I would have my career would
have been at an end before it started I
met accidentally a classmate of mine
from high school who
was going to be an illegal for the stazi
and he had to pass the same test and he
pooped in his pant and he came back and
told him I can't do
this and guess what he had a degree in
engineering he never worked as an
engineer for the rest of his life so
endangered species indeed I had no idea
more more endanger than the entire time
I I operated in the US so why do you
think you were wise or canny enough to
accept the task of finding an apartment
under impossible circumstances and then
to accept the apartment you did accept
without complaint and with good
grace okay triple answer first of all uh
failure was not an option because of the
way my my mother raised me you know I
would come home with a b and I would
tell her there was was the best uh grade
in the entire class she would uh answer
well did they have A's available failure
was not an option number one number two
it was Instinct you know I I found out
many years later when I when I when I
came to uh when I uh uh was confronted
with that concept I'm I'm I'm wired to
be very
stoic so I I I didn't show any emotions
when he uh made made that ridiculous uh
order so so to speak um and thirdly I
accepted this
because I was used to having lived in
miserable conditions not not too good
you know the the college dorms were
pretty crummy it was no
privacy and and so it it was worse than
the dorm but it wasn't something I
couldn't handle okay so so and and you
know and again this this was an
authority figure even though I I I was
anti-authoritarian but I had learned to
play with the Authority or else because
I one at one time when my
anti-authoritarian self ran away with
myself with me in high school I got very
close to being kicked out of high school
severe reprimand in front of the student
body and I realized you got to play ball
and you keep your feelings to
yourself right okay okay so how long
after that did you end up in Montreal
and how did you establish yourself in
North America and oh yeah that and also
I'm curious about you know you you
mentioned that you did observe that life
in West Berlin was in color and of a
higher quality but did you depend on
that rationalization that all that had
been accomplished through oppression and
theft essentially or did you just how
did you deal with that the the
rationalization became part of uh the my
you know what I call foundational
knowledge about the world you know I
didn't think about this repeatedly I
took it in and and I owned it okay so
there was no so um with regard to the
other thing the other question you know
I was supposed to go to West Germany
makes sense right there no culture
differences no language differences and
so forth but uh I also was required to
study another language and they told me
everybody has to and I I picked English
and I was really good at it and so one
day I had a visitor from from Moscow uh
at this point I had an apartment already
but when I got a a key to to the
apartment I was actually officially in
finally it took about six months so uh
so and and he he just wanted to know how
I'm doing with English and I showed him
a book on a shelf I said I can't read
that without the help of a dictionary
and then light bulb went on and
within uh a week I had a tape recorder
and I was asked to say something in
English whatever and uh once they had to
tape within uh a week later I was on a
plane to Moscow where I was interviewed
by a college professor who taught
English or Russian and uh an American
citizen who had uh wound up uh she fell
in love with the Russian somehow and
wound up living in Moscow
and they they were asked
specifically is he good enough can we
teach him English so well that he can
pretend to uh have been born in the
United States the Russians said the
Russians said no the Americans said yeah
I can teach him you know American
optimism and uh so I spent two years in
Moscow where I worked with her and did a
lot of uh phonetic exercises I worked
like a maniac and point you're
remarkably accent
free I I hear my own accent when I
listen to Listen to tapes but certainly
I I don't talk like Arnold schwarzer
right right right so you know I had this
rare talent to acquire uh another
language without a strong accent in my
adulthood okay so so and it at one point
it was determined that I was ready to go
and that's when they sent me to uh
Canada to do two things you know just
figure out what it's like to live in the
United States we thought you know the
Canada was like
a a mini version of the US not quite
true but they didn't know they didn't
know any better uh and and I was
supposed to get a a birth certificate of
an individual of a young man who passed
away at an early age in the US and uh
that was an interesting situation you
know I I can I can talk all day and I
want to be careful not to go too far
because I want to make sure that we
cover all the topics that uh uh that are
important to you so uh bottom line is I
failed to get that birth certificate and
interestingly enough you know he is a he
is a dead person who is asking through
the mail to get his birth certificate uh
I should have been captured right then
and there got lucky uh and uh so after
close to a year uh
a a diplomat a KGB Diplomat in in uh in
Washington DC found the burth at no the
grave Stone of Jack barski who died at
an early age at the age of 11 and he was
able to procure the birth certificate
and at that point I was ready to go and
that was in
1978 1978 okay so I was in Montreal not
long after that I moved there in 198 84
um it was a wonderful place to live I
thought I really enjoyed Montreal um
what was it like for you in Canada there
in Montreal and how did you set up your
your North American life you got your ID
obviously that was necessary and what
did the KGB have have you do at this
point I mean they were setting you up so
you had a life in North America and that
was working successfully well that that
that you know just to answer the what it
was like in in Canada uh you know I
mostly I was a tourist and I had a bar
that I visited a lot so I could talk
with people and I made some friends a
couple of friends I had a a French
Canadian girlfriend and uh one thing I I
got to tell you uh I was at the Forum
when Gila Flur broke the record of uh
most goal scored in a in a home game in
at The Forum in one
season
and and the Forum broke out and
spontaneous Applause there was like 15
minutes there was no game
anymore so that was great and especially
since I had uh learn learned to
appreciate ice hockey while I lived in
Moscow but anyway
uh uh I I came to the United States in
in the fall of 78 and uh my primary task
was to take that birth certificate that
I had to par and parley that into
bonafide American documentation
primarily a driver's license and a
social security card so you could live
and work like a born American I had a
backstory that was y long that had me
live on a farm for a long time and then
eventually uh come to New
York it took close to a year for me to
get these documents because the
instructions that I got from the KGB did
not work they didn't have a clue how to
do this uh but you know the the reason
that they picked somebody like me I you
know I was creative I was able to
improvise don't want to get too much
into details because it gets too long
and so then and then since I couldn't
take my resume with me and I and my
backstory Had Me Like grow up you know
work on a farm for many years uh the
best job I could find was bike messenger
I spent four years um riding a bike and
carrying packages uh in uh in Manhattan
well that must have been exciting
you know it wasn't that bad yeah yeah
yeah well by biking in Manhattan that's
no that's no trivial operation I'm sure
you got to know the city real well I got
to know the city like the palm of my
hand and that that's I also became a
street urchin you know I you know I
knocked the ice cream cones out of
pedestrians that were in my
way and and you know I interacted with a
lot of like very ordinary Americans that
gave me an opportunity to to actually
become an American because theoretically
learning the language and talking to
somebody who had lived in the United
States doesn't make you an American you
have to watch them you have to you know
what they talk about you uh what's
important uh and and and facial
expressions uh uh and you know body
language and all that without that
messenger job I probably would have been
busted too it was I was lucky it was not
by it was by accident and and and
interestingly enough I made enough money
because I was not an employee I didn't
get minimum wage as a bike messenger I
got got commission and I had I made
enough money to go get an apartment and
you know hang out with people and so
forth and uh and then uh without getting
into detail I was supposed to get a
passport and then go uh back to Europe
and uh create establish a company and
the k B was going to she knew how they
knew how to do this uh move money into
that company so that within 2 three
years I would go back to the United
States with a few million dollars uh and
repatriate that money and immediately
become upper middle class and and then
become a really really dangerous agent
okay so what were they that well so
there's a lot of investment um of time
that you're putting into this I mean
obviously and and the KGB is actually
showing possibly a certain degree of
patience what exactly were they setting
you up to accomplish you said they were
going to put you in an upper middle
class position now that You' established
yourself as American what were they
hoping that you could do for the for the
Soviet Union and they told
me that my fin finally my my task was to
uh operate in the realm of foreign
policy getting to know people who make
foreign policy or at least influence
foreign polic policy that was only the
partial truth I found out much later
there was because uh there were the
heads of the illegals two of them after
the KGB was disbanded gave interviews
and the number one value that the KGB
ascribed to my being in the US was my
being in the US and I tell you why that
makes sense uh towards the end of uh uh
the Cold War there there was this this
battle between the CIA and the AGB and
it was constantly and and all the agents
were except for us the illegals were
diplomats so and diplomats were expelled
and then there was retaliation and they
were worried that at one point
diplomatic relations would be completely
uh
interrupted and uh the only ones Left
Behind Enemy Lines would have been us
illegals and guess what who would have
run aldri Jes and and um um forgot his
first name Hansen the the most dangerous
molds in the history of the United
States and the most successful spies for
the for the KGB so they never told me
any of that but so I knew it was like I
was going to you know get to know member
of conservative uh members of the
conservative think tanks and you know
the trilateral commission I don't know
what they what why they were so obsessed
with the trial commission and and they
were very much obsessed with vness
binski and the Colombia Institute for
foreign relations or whatever this
called as a bike messenger and student
and Junior computer programmer I had no
I had no ability to befriend people like
that but I would have had that ability
if I had been able to rise into the
upper middle class very quickly right
and so they were willing to spend the
time and put in the energy to give you
that very well-developed backstory in
the hope that you would be positioned
maybe in a decade or something it was
long-term game yeah they they were not
impatient they actually were very very
appreciative of the fact that I
improvised a lot and and overcame
obstacles and you know you don't get the
order of the red
banner if you weren't doing really well
right right so they okay so they were
regarding all your maneuvering and your
problem solving in North America as
exactly what you should be doing now you
said thank God that those plans didn't
materialize now so so how did your
career develop after that and why and
why are you pleased that it that the
goal that was in mind for you didn't
make itself manifest because because I'm
able to talk to One Dr Jordan Peterson
today my life my life changed so
radically for the best God forbid I'm
I'm a successful KGB AG and the Wall
comes down I'm say what's going on here
and then the Soviet Union falls apart
now I'm stuck I I would not have
uh notified the FBI of my existence I
would have gone back to Russia and I
would now live a very miserable life in
Russia because I never served Russia I
served not even the Soviet Union I
served the Communist cause so and you
know and I
learned the truth and as I say the truth
shall set you free I'm I'm a free SII
citizen to the extent you still have all
the freedoms that we supposed to have
right right okay so so let's let's now
let's jump ahead now you start working
as a coder if I remember correctly yes
sir I did okay and at some point you
come to the attention of the FBI how
does that how do you start that new new
career and and how do you come to the
attention of the FBI well I came to the
attention of the FBI because of a
betrayal and this is an another
situation where I would if the person
was still alive I would thank him on my
knees for his betrayal
it's uh he was an archist by his the
name of vasil moken he was an archist in
in the KGB and uh he had access to uh
all the records because he managed the
records and he started reading those
records and he found out like what an
evil organization the KGB was so he he
developed a severe hatred uh of the
Soviet system and the KGB and he figured
out the only way to do damage is to uh
copy some information and over many
years he uh took handwritten small
pieces of paper with handwritten notes
on them in his underwear and in his
shoes and his socks
and then transcribed them and and piled
it all up in Buried the material in the
datra and in
1992 he wound up uh in Estonia at at one
of the British Embassy at the British
Embassy and told MI6 what he had and uh
they were able to uh dig dig this stuff
up and uh took it to England and
eventually shared some of the
information it took a while with uh with
the FBI
and uh amongst that enormous amount of
data there was a couple of sentences
there's a fellow named Jack barski who
is an illegal KGB undercover agent he
lives in the northeast of the United
States and it didn't take the FBI very
long to find me because you know they
looked at Social Security data and uh
there was only one Jack barsky they
found who got his social security card
at the age of like 35 or something
right okay so you when did you what year
did you move to Manhattan I arrived in
New York in 78 and I was in Manhattan in
78 I stayed one year in a hotel okay so
you were you were you were successfully
undercover for at least 15 years and so
you spent a bunch of oh successfully
undercover not detected was 19 years uh
in the service in the service of the KGB
only 10
years I resigned after for 10 years oh
okay so how Okay so so how did the
resignation come about and
why so uh and you will you will
understand that I I uh I I'm given to
understand that you have a great
relationship with your daughter so this
is what happened uh I had a girlfriend
in the US who I married without getting
again too much into detail and she
decided to become
pregnant and and uh I watched this
little girl grow
up and when she
turned 18 months I knew I was in love
with this girl and it
was I I I was so much in love with her
that I could not imagine leaving
her and I I tell people this this is
when when the Arrogant uh uh Adventurer
joined the human race oh yeah because
because this this was a an attack of
unconditional love and at at that time
the KGB got spooked and they thought I
was about to be arrested by by the FBI
and they uh they that we had an
emergency procedure there was uh we both
know knew what to do if there's an
emergency and they activated that
procedure with a with a signal on on a
at a signal spot and and I and and I
walk by that spot every day and all of a
sudden one day I see this red dot uh and
that said Danger get out of here
immediately and the I'm sorry for that
bad word but the the only I have to say
it because this what popped into my head
oh what do I do now I want to take
care I had no idea how to how to take
care of this child and and I knew that
if I leave her she would grow up and in
poverty because her mother had only four
years of
schooling okay and so I went back and
forth back and forth I uh uh I played
for a time but it got to a point
where um they were checking on me say
what's going on and they found me and uh
there's a a man came up to me I was
waiting for a subway train and he sidled
up to me and he whispered with a clear
Russian accent he said you got to come
home or else you're dead
dead now the point was that they knew
that I knew that they knew uh because
before that they could I could have been
in a hospital my my radio could have
been broken a lot of things could have
been happening to me and I was not able
to comply well so uh now I had to make a
decision the the do you know what a dead
drw operation is no uh it's uh it's an
operation where you hand over not
information but uh um something that has
weight and dimensions such as a passport
money and so forth okay and you put it
in you put it in a container and you
drop it someplace where somebody else
would pick it up so they uh through a
shortwave radio they have um told me to
go to a dent drop operation this one day
and at that point I went because I knew
there would be money and a passport so I
at at minimum I would just pocket the
money right I had not made a
decision and it was really interesting
because when I went the Dead Drop
operation has couple of signals involved
so the first signal is the person who
deposits the container says I go and get
it okay I put it there so I saw the
signal and I went to the place and that
place was impossible to to miss because
I had found it myself it was a tree with
a hollow bottom and there was no
container there was no crushed oil can
and I just I did a double take I walked
around walked around wasn't there I walk
out of that out of the
park and my
subconscious again made a decision and
it said I'm
staying that was that was an irrational
decision because everything I knew at
the time that was good for me was over
over there in the East I would have gone
back as a Conquering Hero uh I I was
married in Germany too and um and even
if I manage to stay and the FBI doesn't
arrest me if they do arrest me I'm no
good for this child either so I should
have rationalized and I got to go I have
no choice my subconscious overrode any
of that logical thinking and it
obviously it was a tremendous risk but I
I had no choice it was it's the power of
unconditional love yeah well that's
that's a very interesting issue so it
sounds to me and correct me if I'm wrong
that what you're relating is that the
love that you developed for your
daughter so I would I I would Hazard to
Guess that that was perhaps the first
genuine love that you had in your life
and that that was enough to break the
grip of your intellectual hubris it's
something like that is that
correct 100% correct because there was a
there was a point when this girl she was
uh about 5 years old and she she was she
couldn't she wasn't admitted to
kindergarten because she was uh behind
in her uh ability to speak and I told my
I told my colleagues I said I think my
daughter's a little dummy but I love her
anyway so so intellect to me was not
important anymore so you're right about
that uh and uh
uh yeah the the other times I was in
love there was it was passion and there
was obviously sex involved there's no
sex involved and unconditional means you
can't get anything back but a smile so
how did you actually manage to get out I
mean that must have been with its I mean
I can't I can't understand why they let
you out and then well and then let's
let's discuss how you ended up working
for the FBI uh so yeah they uh
um uh they hired themselves a brilliant
guy with a uh with a brilliant
subconscious and it popped into my head
and said oh wait a minute I just tell
him I can't come because I have HIV
AIDS and since I knew to be have been
brutally honest with everything and
since they didn't know that I had a
child I was certain of that they
couldn't think of a reason why I was
lying to them it worked okay okay and so
how do you how did you come to the
eventual attention of the FBI and what
did it mean that you worked for them
okay so uh you know first of all I I
spent uh another nine years working on
my version of the American dream you
know I moved to the suburbs we had
another child I moved to another house
and eventually wound up in a in a
mcmansion so yeah I had checked out of
uh out of the political thinking
philosophical thinking I was more into
consumerism and and doing good things
for the
family uh and uh that uh was disrupted
when one day an FBI agent showed up and
uh again I'm I'm shortening this and
told told him you know FBI we want to
have a chat with you I had forgotten at
that point I had put this in the way
back in
uh in memory never to be accessed again
that I once was an agent H so that no
that came right back
bam uh so you had fall right into life
as an American at that point and to this
new identity oh yeah absolutely yeah and
I knew I would never go see Germany
again I would never apply for a passport
again I would I didn't want to risk that
so I would you know live a decent life
have a great great career I was making
more and more money and uh and retire
play golf right so you joined the upper
middle class in any case yes I
did and so the FBI how did the FBI find
you and then what did what did they want
from you well what they wanted from me
it wasn't quite clear initially uh but
they they knew uh that they
couldn't wait a minute did they know
that I was already declared de uh I
can't but I in in our first interview I
told them that I don't exist in in in
Germany anymore so they couldn't turn me
okay that would have been a great but
and they also no they now I remember
they found out after observing me for
two years that I wasn't active
anymore so I was not I was not a Target
to be turned but I was a Target to be
debriefed in the greatest of detail we I
spent uh hours and hours talking with
the the agent who interviewed me about
every single detail in my life and
apparently that is very useful because
even you know the successors of the of
the
KGB you know who who were they trained
by KGB agent you know there's a DNA that
uh organizational DNA that's handed down
it was the information that I gave them
was considered very very useful and one
other thing uh at the time when they
caught up with me
uh Hansen and Ames were still
operational no they had been caught I'm
sorry but there were concerns that there
were other molds and that I might be
running one of them so sometimes finding
out a negative is is actually a really
good thing uh the fact of the ma fact of
the matter the FBI leadership was so uh
impressed with what uh the the the the
FBI team did that uh my the the lead
agent got a commendation by the FB by
the head of the FBI
so it is what it is you know I I'm not
making that up you ask them they will
tell you it was that was really good
information that I was able to give them
so what do you think it was that you
provided to them that they found so
useful uh what what what makes foreign
illegal what kinds of people the uh uh
the the KGB was recruiting turns out
that CIA is recruiting the same type of
people right right well that makes sense
I I have I have friends in the CIA and
and it's almost identical you know
there's a list of character traits that
uh you know things that you're born with
rather than you acquire not skills yeah
that uh the KGB was looking for and I
shared that list with a with a retired
CIA agent and he said well that's that
we had the same
list but you know this confirmation is
is important for for Counter
Intelligence uh and to what to what
extent you know that that is
specifically useful you know as far as
the psychology is concerned I don't know
that I don't I don't uh I I don't know
the details I was also given uh a uh a a
test by two eminent psychologists in uh
on a contract with the FBI they gave me
two two days of test and I uh what the
lady who gave me the war shock test uh
claim to fame was that she also analyzed
the unibomber and when she was done she
said when she was done she
said I have never interviewed somebody
who had that many stories to tell about
these damn ink
blots right so it's creativity right I I
had to be creative to to to be
successful when you when you look back
over your career I've got two questions
for you I want to know when you look a
back over your the course of your life
um what do you regret and what are you
thankful for and I'm also interested now
you you had immersed yourself in this
value and belief system that
characterized communism you obviously
abandoned Your Allegiance to that in
favor of at least in part in favor of
the relationship with your daughter but
you also make Illusions in your book to
starting to study other philosophical
matters and religious matters and so
first question is what when you look
back on your life and your career how do
you evaluate what you did and where you
ended up ethically and morally and
second how did you when you abandoned
Your Allegiance to the utopian vision of
the
Communists and you started inquiring
philosophically and theologically into
other domains what did you
conclude no good very good question the
the one thing I regret is that uh uh the
woman I loved in Germany when I when
when I decided not to go back to my
German family uh it was because of the
love for a child but I abandoned that
woman and I loved her and I broke my
promise uh that that I that can't be
undone and and that's really what the
most regret I have I don't regret
anything that I did as a as an illegal
agent
simply because I was never told whether
let's say some of the people that I
pointed to for possible recruits were
recruited what happened to them I have I
have no knowledge of what I should
regret if there was was something else
so uh what there's no specific guilts
that you carry for the things that you
because partly because you don't know
what the consequences of the more yes
they they they NE they never once uh
congrat ulated me on a on a tip that I
gave them I never got any feedback
period okay that that that's one of the
weaknesses of the KGB by the way because
if you have to make uh uh decisions on
on your own all the time and you don't
have a proper frame of reference you
wind up making bad decisions right right
right without the broad yeah well that's
the problem with not informing people
right is you have no context to guide
you when you're making decisions yeah
and and and that secrecy was rooted in
in in the Revolutionary background of
the of the KGB you know the cell
structure you know you okay so uh what
I'm grateful for first of all I'm
grateful uh for uh living in the
greatest country that ever existed on
this Earth particularly the country as
it was constructed by the uh by the
founders simply because I I I'm a
student of history and I am convinced
that one one of the uh one of the
biggest flaws that that left-wing
thinking has is the idea that man is
fundamentally good and all we have to do
is and that communism was the same thing
we have to take the shackles away from
them it's the circumstances and I know
for a fact when you look at history and
and you just there's so much anecdotal
evidence that man we all have uh the
seed of evil in US many of us and the
majority of us
deal with it very well but it turns out
in history uh the the the ruling people
were mostly
evil you know and so and so the
Constitution is constructed in such a
way to to manage that evil not
eradicated it manage it by you know the
separation of powers and and the whole
idea that all men created are created
evil and have these inali inable rights
that appeals to to me to to my appeals
to my anti
authorism and uh and my absolute discust
with
collectivism we are not getting the
rights from the buff we are not getting
the rights from from the law the the law
actually can take rights away from us
some of them uh are necessary to be
taken away such as you know uh you know
to get the funds to to defend the
country and so forth but most the laws
that we have in this country are taking
rights away from us so uh it is what it
is but how did you come to the
conclusion or what convinced you of the
validity and utility of the doctrine of
inalienable rights is that certainly
that's certainly not a hypothesis
associated with communist utopianism for
example wh why did you come to that
conclusion that's that's a good leading
question be because I became a Christian
and uh
the it was a pretty uh slow progress I
became a deist first because I after I
started thinking about and and getting
exposed to like uh thinkers like Theus
Lewis uh I re I realized when my atheism
was an idiotic belief
system you know to to to just believe
that uh the universe just exploded out
of
nothing uh and then ordered itself and
in a way that we have all this
complexity that that makes perfectly no
sense and let's let's
assume even it it was already there you
know it it it violates the the third law
of
thermodynamics
when a closed system which the universe
is ultimately a closed system uh will
tend towards this order so where where
does the order come from so there was a
logic behind me becoming a deist and uh
then the love word came into play again
uh I was evangelized by a woman that I
hired um but I didn't become a Christian
because I wanted to marry her she she
she opened my eyes to the Bible and we
and I started the first time uh she
quoted me something out of the Bible I
saidit wait a minute this is the most I
knew that the most widely read book in
in the history of mankind with no close
second and I don't know anything about
it so we did some Bible study and then
she invited me to church and at that
time the love word came came back into
play I was in a really really bad
divorce uh with the the the woman that I
had married and that had had the
daughter that I was in love with she she
went mentally ill and it was a lengthy
divorce and I was the only time in my
life I was actually depressed and um U
this young lady who I secretly courted I
was I was in love with her she didn't
know that she invited me to the church
and as it happens so often when you go
to church and the you listen to the
pastor you know he was talking to you
because he was talking about the love of
God so why why do you think okay so what
do you make of love then you know you
said that the first time it really
transformed you was a consequence of
whatever manifested itself to you and
your daughter and this the the effect of
Love on your life was what would you say
it was outside of the domain of mere
rationality and so what do you make of
the transforming power of that love and
how do you how does that fit into your
intellectual
apprehension love to me is uh the
strongest emotion that that humans can
have and we are ultimately emotional
beings so when they say love conquers
all I I have proof and and and as I'm as
I embrac the faith and as I realized
what what God did for
us uh
I I've become a real loving
person loving even the ones
that you that you don't
like
because the love is something that says
something about
yourself if you can love the
unlikable that that makes you whole so
to
speak and and you and and you know the
love of the the life of
Jesus uh is
so so phenomenal the way I would like to
like be living and be
seen at least I'm trying to get to that
point and I think I've I've traveled a
long way and and one of the things that
uh uh made a huge difference in in my
life the last year coming to
Texas and being being around a lot of
loving wonderful people and great
churches that are not afraid
to talk about what's going on in society
these days not cowardly like many others
that uh that I've visited so let me let
me I'm going to talk for everybody
watching and listening I'm I'm I'm going
to talk um for another half an hour with
Jack on the daily wire side and I think
we'll probably go deeper into this issue
of Faith because we've covered a fair
bit of his autobiography which is what I
often do um and so maybe we'll close
with this I mean as you know um the
power of left-wing utopianism has made
itself manifest once again in the west I
mean I spent a lot of time traveling in
Eastern Europe in the last few years and
one of the questions that I was
constantly bombarded with in Eastern
Europe was how is it that the West could
come under the sway of the ideas that
were so destructive to us for so long
and and what could we do about it what I
would like to ask you is for the people
who are watching and listening like you
out LED in some detail what you found
attractive about the utopianism that was
being um offered to you as a purpose for
Life what message would you have to
young people who were now attracted by
that vision of helping the world's
oppressed and poor identifying the
oppressors and and having the adventure
that goes along with that pathway to
Redemption I mean that was offered to
you you followed it for a long time you
eventually rejected it you found a
religious calling instead you but you
understand why that Vision was so
attractive so what what what can you say
that's that might be of some utility to
young people who are attracted by those
utopian ideas well if uh I would say if
you respect
yourself you don't want to be a fool do
you I'm talking to a young person now
you don't want to be a
fool
so you are being fooled all the time I
tell you that you need to go check out
the truth and not just take it in as
it's being presented to you the same way
I took it in uh but the difference is we
didn't have a Marketplace of
opportunities there there is a
Marketplace of opportunities you can
find out the undeniable truth you're
being lied to all the time and uh that
makes you a puppet and that that takes
your the individual individuality out of
you who you are uh you think that's
going to make for a happy fulfilled life
you're meant to be an individual and not
a member of a crowd so what what is it
that you how old are you now and first
let's start with that how I'm 73 and
what do you what do you occupy your time
with
now oh you you know I I am so lucky that
uh I don't have to use the phrase thank
God it's Friday anymore I get to create
I write I do public speaking and I just
uh uh developed a master class that I
call uh applied spyology
that uh is primarily going to be talking
to uh young people mostly men I think
and I I think the you know another voice
uh like like that that is sort of uh
side by side next to you is probably not
not competition I think it's a it's a
good thing to have and uh uh with regard
to that um I am I'm
offering uh the the
audience um some something extra I'm I'm
assuming there's going to be question
and and we we have a we developed a
website where we can where people can
uh get to the website and ask the
questions and I will answer every one of
them personally the website is called uh
KGB spicy.com
and we'll have a little bonus uh there's
a there's a document that I can share as
a freebie that uh uh uh points out how
the how the KGB uh uh uh operated in in
the realm of
persuasion that is not necessarily evil
right because when you look at what Dale
Carnegie taught it can be used for good
and for evil so so so that's where I'm
at and this is this is my I I have a I
have a dual mission in life mission
number one is taking care of my
13-year-old I have a young daughter uh
and and Mission number to is uh to uh do
what I'm planning to do is work with
with whoever wants to listen to me but
primarily young people to help them EV
evade a a destiny that when they become
useful idiots that will the useful
idiots will be thrown away as you know
yeah yes I'm aware of that yeah yeah so
what do you think that the people that
you're trying to reach will learn as a
consequence of taking your course
and and and and you you're you're making
Illusions to psychology what are you
trying to persuade them of convince them
of teach them
about yeah so so this this is going to
be more or less uh infotainment you know
I'm going to share some things uh that
that uh are not necessarily in the book
you know had to do with my operating as
a spy and then uh draw some conclusions
uh where I say well
this is what helped me get out of this
mess and know by the way you can acquire
some of these skills yourself such as uh
for instance like develop your
subconscious you know I studied people
all my life I I can read people like
this right now and it's it's it's it's
coming from my subconscious I'm not you
know and and there's a few other things
and uh also you know I wasn't taught
people skills but I acquired
them and uh again I I can talk about
those and and coming from me uh with the
with the with the background I have and
the fact that I'm still talking to you
and I managed to get through all this
nonsense that I was in uh I think it it
may add value um um you know I
absolutely respect you as an academician
I have admired you since I found you uh
you you you know having a scientific
background uh it's it's great to you
know have all almost Synergy with uh you
know with what I'm coming up up with
instinctively with what you come up with
uh through science so um yeah well it
sounds to me like you're trying to offer
at least to the degree that that can be
done in a virtual environment some of
the mentorship even that you found know
yes sir mhm yeah well young people you
you need you need you know you even
referred to this with regards to the
first Contact you had at the KGB the
fact that he offered himself as a mentor
filled a void in your life and and that
is absolutely necessary is people need
an apprenticeship and a mentor
definitely especially if they don't have
it at home and and the other thing that
they need is uh uh accountability
Partners if they if they want to make
changes happen they need to have an
accountability partner right right right
right yeah yeah all right well good is
there is there anything else that you'd
like to bring to the attention of this
this audience in particular this more
General audience before we go to the
other interview just just let me let me
just tell you tell you one thing and and
I'm going out on a limb here when I got
the the email from your
producer I got emotional I'm not going
to go any further this this was
this
was so important to me to be able to
talk to you and I'm I'm I'm so so glad
that it happened well thank you very
much sir um I appreciate also the
opportunity to have heard your story and
to have the privilege too of bringing to
the attention of all the people that'll
be watching and listening I'm going to
talk to jack barsky for another half an
hour on the daily wire side I think
we'll delve into the philosophical and
Theological in some more detail on that
in that half an hour and I'd like to
thank you sir very much for your
forthright comments today and for
walking us through the strange
transformations of your life and for
shedding some light on well how one
person was pulled into this terrible
ideological battle that's been going on
for while the greater part of the last
century and and I'd like to thank
everybody watching and listening for
their time and attention and for the
daily wire plus folks for making this
conversation
possible thank you very much sir you're
most welcome thank
[Music]
you